Readme.md, before:

# Rfam Taxonomy

Based on **Rfam 15.1** (January 2026). See [releases](https://github.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/releases) for previous versions.

This repository contains the code and data for analysing the taxonomic distribution
of the [Rfam](https://rfam.org) families. The goal is to identify domain-specific
subsets of Rfam covariance models for annotating bacterial, eukaryotic,
and other genomes with the [Infernal](http://eddylab.org/infernal) software.

The code uses the Rfam [public MySQL database](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/database.html)
to compare the taxonomic domains of sequences from the manually curated
[seed alignments](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/glossary.html)
and the automatically identified [full region](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/glossary.html) hits.

:open_file_folder: The results are organised in several files in the [domains folder](./domains).
Each file contains seven columns:

1. `Family` = Rfam accession (e.g. RF00001)
2. `Domain` = Taxonomic domain where the family is found (:grey_exclamation: this is the most important column)
3. `Seed domains` = All taxonomic domains from the seed alignment
4. `Full region domains` = All taxonomic domains from full region hits
5. `Rfam ID` = Rfam identifier (e.g. 5S_rRNA)
6. `Description` = Family description
7. `RNA type` = One of Rfam [RNA types](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/searching-rfam.html#search-by-entry-type).

## Rules for the `Domain` field

The `Domain` field (column 2) is determined by the following rules:

- **Single domain** (e.g., _Bacteria_, _Eukaryota_): Used if the majority of hits (≥90%) are from the same domain in both seed and full region hits.
- **A+B**: If both a parent domain (A) and its subgroup (B) are above the 90% cutoff in either seed or full region the field is shown as `A+B` (e.g., _Eukaryota+Fungi_).
- **A/B**: If seed and full region domains are different and do not fit the parent/subgroup rule, the field is `<seed domain>/<full region domain>`. For example, _Viruses/Eukaryota_ means the seed alignment is mostly Viruses and the full region hits are mostly Eukaryota.
- **Mixed**: Used if there is no single domain where the family occurs (i.e., no domain is above the cutoff and the distribution is ambiguous). For example, 5S rRNA [RF00001](http://rfam.org/family/RF00001) is found in _Bacteria_, _Archaea_, and _Eukaryota_.
- **A/Mixed** or **Mixed/B**: If one of the seed or full region domains is `Mixed` or `No Data`, the field is shown as `<seed domain>/Mixed` or `Mixed/<full region domain>`.
- **No Data**: If there is no data for a family in the full region, the field is shown as `A/No Data` as appropriate.

### Parent-child domain relationships

Some taxonomic groups are considered subgroups of major domains. As of now, parent domains must be one of the major taxonomic domains: _Archaea_, _Bacteria_, _Eukaryota_, _Viruses_, _Viroids_, or _Other_.

Currently defined subgroups:

- _Fungi_ is a subgroup of _Eukaryota_

If both a parent and its subgroup are above the cutoff, or if one is the parent and the other is its subgroup, the domain is shown as `Parent+Subgroup` (e.g., _Eukaryota+Fungi_). This helps clarify cases where a family is strongly represented in both a major domain and a specific subgroup.

In the `Seed domains` and `Full region domains` columns (columns 3 and 4), subgroups are displayed with their parent prefix to indicate the hierarchical relationship (e.g., _Eukaryota/Fungi_). The percentages for subgroups are also included in their parent domain's percentage.

(If you add more subgroups in the code, update this section accordingly.)

:white_check_mark: View [summary](./domains/Readme.md) with the number of families observed in each domain.

## Retrieving the data

The latest version of the files can be retrieved directly from GitHub using the following URL format:

- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/all-domains.csv
- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/bacteria.csv
- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/archaea.csv
- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/viruses.csv

 It is also possible to download the data and use it locally or regenerate the files (see the **Installation** section below).

## Example use cases

- If you are interested in a subset of Rfam families that match Bacteria, you can use the [bacteria.csv](./domains/bacteria.csv) file. For example, the following command generates a `bacteria.cm` file with a subset of Rfam covariance models that can be used with the Infernal _cmscan_ program:

    ```
    curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/bacteria.csv | \
    cut -f 1,1 -d ',' | \
    tail -n +2 | \
    cmfetch -o bacteria.cm -f Rfam.cm.gz -
    ```

    where _cmfetch_ is part of the Infernal suite and `Rfam.cm.gz` can be downloaded from `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/Rfam/CURRENT/Rfam.cm.gz`.

    The same approach works for any domain or subgroup (e.g. Archaea or Fungi) by just replacing `bacteria` in the command above with the name of the domain or subgroup.

    **Note for subgroups:** Subgroup files like [fungi.csv](./domains/fungi.csv) contain two types of families: (1) families that are ≥90% from that subgroup (Domain field = `Fungi`), and (2) families that are primarily from the parent domain but have significant (>5%) representation from the subgroup (Domain field = `Eukaryota` or containing the parent name). To extract only families that are ≥90% from a subgroup, filter the Domain field (column 2):

    ```
    # Get only families that are ≥90% Fungi
    curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/fungi.csv | \
    awk -F',' '$2 == "Fungi" || $2 ~ /Fungi\+/ {print $1}' | \
    tail -n +2 | \
    cmfetch -o fungi-90pct.cm -f Rfam.cm.gz -
    ```

- You can also further process the [all-domains.csv](./domains/all-domains.csv) file. For example, to eliminate any families that find hits outside Bacteria, you can focus on rows where the second column is `Bacteria` and the third and the fourth columns contain `Bacteria (100.0%)`. Note that such a subset would ignore many important RNA families that detect some contamination in eukaryotic sequences.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Installation

### Requirements

- [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/)
- [pip](https://pypi.org/project/pip/)

Clone or download this repository and run the following commands:

```
virtualenv ENV
source ENV/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Updating the data

After each Rfam release, the data in this repo need to be updated locally and
pushed to GitHub.

1. Generate new data

    ```
    # when running for the first time (needs to run in this order):
    python rfam-taxonomy.py --precompute-full
    python rfam-taxonomy.py --precompute-seed

    # after precompute is done, run:
    python rfam-taxonomy.py

    # to see additional options:
    python rfam-taxonomy.py --help
    ```

1. Review the changes

    The results must be manually reviewed before committing the new files by checking the difference between the old and the new versions using git.

    It is normal for the values in the 3rd and 4th columns to change but `Domain`, the 2nd column, should stay stable unless the affected family has been significantly updated.

1. Update release info in Readme

1. Create new GitHub release

## Feedback

Feel free to create [GitHub issues](https://github.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/issues) to ask questions or provide feedback.
Pull requests are also welcome.

Commit message:

Fix code review issues and clarify domain assignment logic
Address Copilot code review feedback and simplify domain assignment rules:

Code cleanup and bug fixes:
- Remove unreachable duplicate parent/subgroup logic (lines 157-168)
- Consolidate SUBGROUP_PARENT definition to single global constant
- Remove unused parent_to_subgroup variable
- Fix Mixed/No Data handling to properly distinguish between the two states
- Fix subgroup file filtering to use Domain field substring matching

Domain assignment logic improvements:
- Simplify A+B to mean only one thing: multiple domains ≥90% in same dataset
- Remove confusing parent/subgroup A+B logic for seed/full mismatches
- Use standard A/B format for all seed/full differences including parent/subgroup pairs
- Properly handle all No Data combinations (No Data/A, A/No Data, No Data/No Data)
- Distinguish Mixed from No Data in all cases (previously conflated)

Subgroup file filtering improvements:
- Include families where subgroup name appears anywhere in Domain field
- Simplify logic to avoid false negatives for Mixed/* and *+Subgroup patterns
- Consolidate duplicate threshold check into single location

Documentation updates:
- Clarify A+B applies only to multiple domains ≥90% in single dataset
- Document A/B for all seed/full differences including parent/subgroup
- Update No Data rule to show all possible combinations
- Fix capitalization in example (archaea, fungi)

This makes the code more maintainable with SUBGROUP_PARENT defined once,
eliminates dead code, and provides clearer semantics for domain labels.

Readme.md, after:

# Rfam Taxonomy

Based on **Rfam 15.1** (January 2026). See [releases](https://github.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/releases) for previous versions.

This repository contains the code and data for analysing the taxonomic distribution
of the [Rfam](https://rfam.org) families. The goal is to identify domain-specific
subsets of Rfam covariance models for annotating bacterial, eukaryotic,
and other genomes with the [Infernal](http://eddylab.org/infernal) software.

The code uses the Rfam [public MySQL database](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/database.html)
to compare the taxonomic domains of sequences from the manually curated
[seed alignments](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/glossary.html)
and the automatically identified [full region](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/glossary.html) hits.

:open_file_folder: The results are organised in several files in the [domains folder](./domains).
Each file contains seven columns:

1. `Family` = Rfam accession (e.g. RF00001)
2. `Domain` = Taxonomic domain where the family is found (:grey_exclamation: this is the most important column)
3. `Seed domains` = All taxonomic domains from the seed alignment
4. `Full region domains` = All taxonomic domains from full region hits
5. `Rfam ID` = Rfam identifier (e.g. 5S_rRNA)
6. `Description` = Family description
7. `RNA type` = One of Rfam [RNA types](https://rfam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/searching-rfam.html#search-by-entry-type).

## Rules for the `Domain` field

The `Domain` field (column 2) is determined by the following rules:

- **Single domain** (e.g., _Bacteria_, _Eukaryota_): Used if the majority of hits (≥90%) are from the same domain in both seed and full region hits.
- **A+B**: If multiple domains are each ≥90% within a single dataset (seed or full), they are joined with `+` (e.g., _Eukaryota+Fungi_). This occurs with parent/subgroup relationships where the subgroup's sequences contribute to both the parent and subgroup counts, allowing both to exceed 90%.
- **A/B**: If seed and full region domains are different, the field is `<seed domain>/<full region domain>`. For example, _Viruses/Eukaryota_ means the seed alignment is mostly Viruses and the full region hits are mostly Eukaryota. This also applies to parent/subgroup pairs when they differ between seed and full.
- **Mixed**: Used if there is no single domain where the family occurs (i.e., no domain is above the cutoff and the distribution is ambiguous). For example, 5S rRNA [RF00001](http://rfam.org/family/RF00001) is found in _Bacteria_, _Archaea_, and _Eukaryota_.
- **A/Mixed** or **Mixed/B**: If one of the seed or full region domains is `Mixed`, the field is shown as `<seed domain>/Mixed` or `Mixed/<full region domain>`.
- **A/No Data** or **No Data/B**: If there is no data for a family in either the seed or full region, the field is shown as `<seed domain>/No Data`, `No Data/<full region domain>`, or `No Data` if both lack data.

### Parent-child domain relationships

Some taxonomic groups are considered subgroups of major domains. As of now, parent domains must be one of the major taxonomic domains: _Archaea_, _Bacteria_, _Eukaryota_, _Viruses_, _Viroids_, or _Other_.

Currently defined subgroups:

- _Fungi_ is a subgroup of _Eukaryota_

If both a parent and its subgroup are above the cutoff, or if one is the parent and the other is its subgroup, the domain is shown as `Parent+Subgroup` (e.g., _Eukaryota+Fungi_). This helps clarify cases where a family is strongly represented in both a major domain and a specific subgroup.

In the `Seed domains` and `Full region domains` columns (columns 3 and 4), subgroups are displayed with their parent prefix to indicate the hierarchical relationship (e.g., _Eukaryota/Fungi_). The percentages for subgroups are also included in their parent domain's percentage.

(If you add more subgroups in the code, update this section accordingly.)

:white_check_mark: View [summary](./domains/Readme.md) with the number of families observed in each domain.

## Retrieving the data

The latest version of the files can be retrieved directly from GitHub using the following URL format:

- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/all-domains.csv
- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/bacteria.csv
- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/archaea.csv
- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/viruses.csv

 It is also possible to download the data and use it locally or regenerate the files (see the **Installation** section below).

## Example use cases

- If you are interested in a subset of Rfam families that match Bacteria, you can use the [bacteria.csv](./domains/bacteria.csv) file. For example, the following command generates a `bacteria.cm` file with a subset of Rfam covariance models that can be used with the Infernal _cmscan_ program:

    ```
    curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/bacteria.csv | \
    cut -f 1,1 -d ',' | \
    tail -n +2 | \
    cmfetch -o bacteria.cm -f Rfam.cm.gz -
    ```

    where _cmfetch_ is part of the Infernal suite and `Rfam.cm.gz` can be downloaded from `ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/Rfam/CURRENT/Rfam.cm.gz`.

    The same approach works for any domain or subgroup (e.g. archaea or fungi) by just replacing `bacteria` in the command above with the name of the domain or subgroup.

    **Note for subgroups:** Subgroup files like [fungi.csv](./domains/fungi.csv) contain two types of families: (1) families that are ≥90% from that subgroup (Domain field = `Fungi`), and (2) families that are primarily from the parent domain but have significant (>5%) representation from the subgroup (Domain field = `Eukaryota` or containing the parent name). To extract only families that are ≥90% from a subgroup, filter the Domain field (column 2):

    ```
    # Get only families that are ≥90% Fungi
    curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/master/domains/fungi.csv | \
    awk -F',' '$2 == "Fungi" || $2 ~ /Fungi\+/ {print $1}' | \
    tail -n +2 | \
    cmfetch -o fungi-90pct.cm -f Rfam.cm.gz -
    ```

- You can also further process the [all-domains.csv](./domains/all-domains.csv) file. For example, to eliminate any families that find hits outside Bacteria, you can focus on rows where the second column is `Bacteria` and the third and the fourth columns contain `Bacteria (100.0%)`. Note that such a subset would ignore many important RNA families that detect some contamination in eukaryotic sequences.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Installation

### Requirements

- [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/)
- [pip](https://pypi.org/project/pip/)

Clone or download this repository and run the following commands:

```
virtualenv ENV
source ENV/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Updating the data

After each Rfam release, the data in this repo need to be updated locally and
pushed to GitHub.

1. Generate new data

    ```
    # when running for the first time (needs to run in this order):
    python rfam-taxonomy.py --precompute-full
    python rfam-taxonomy.py --precompute-seed

    # after precompute is done, run:
    python rfam-taxonomy.py

    # to see additional options:
    python rfam-taxonomy.py --help
    ```

1. Review the changes

    The results must be manually reviewed before committing the new files by checking the difference between the old and the new versions using git.

    It is normal for the values in the 3rd and 4th columns to change but `Domain`, the 2nd column, should stay stable unless the affected family has been significantly updated.

1. Update release info in Readme

1. Create new GitHub release

## Feedback

Feel free to create [GitHub issues](https://github.com/Rfam/rfam-taxonomy/issues) to ask questions or provide feedback.
Pull requests are also welcome.
